Once around, simp 0136.
These names get more obscure, don't
they? But this one is a very interesting
object, albeit rather faint. So, let's
have a look at it. Discovered in 2009 by
the Spitzer Space Telescope, an infrared
telescope, and followed up by Hubble and
then more recently by the James Webb
telescope as well. It's in the
constellation of Pisces, the fish, but
you're not going to be able to track it
down with amateur equipment. It's far
too faint. Somebody will probably prove
me wrong for saying that, but uh I don't
mind.
It's moving. It's changing its position
by over one arcsecond every year. As we
observe the precise location of it from
year to year, we can see that this means
it must be close to the sun. And in
fact, parallax methods of measurement
using the earth's orbit as a baseline
give us a figure of around 20 light
years.
Now, the brightness of it, magnitude 21,
that really is a bit of a challenge.
Pluto is about 13 and each step on the
magnitude scale is a factor of 2.5.
Five steps is in fact a factor of a 100.
That's where the definition of a
magnitude uh comes from. It's the uh 2.5
is the fifth root of 100. In fact, um
2.512 to be precise.
So this is going on for 10 magnitudes uh
fainter than Pluto and therefore a
factor of several thousand times fainter
overall. So very difficult to observe
indeed. But with these amazing space
telescopes, we've been able to pick this
up and watch it move across the sky from
year to year.
So what is it? Well, we think it's a
rogue planet,
a planet without a star to orbit. And
these can originate in one of a number
of ways. It's possible that they could
have formed separately. Could have
formed in a cloud of gas and dust and
just collapsed under their own gravity
or with a group of other objects uh as
part of a larger cluster perhaps or
indeed as part of a stellar system. And
this might have been the one of the
planets around another star that's been
kicked out of that star system by a
close encounter. Perhaps two of the
planets came close to each other and the
gravitational slingshot hurled this one
out across space. So now it's just
minding its own business and orbiting
the Milky Way galaxy much as our sun
does on its 250 millionyear journey
around the Milky Way.
We seem to find be finding quite a lot
of these rogue planets, these free
floating planets if you want to call
them that instead. And uh that's
obviously a sign that our instruments
are getting better. But S0136
is particularly interesting.
It's part of a moving group, the Karina
near stellar moving group. This is about
20 fairly faint stars that have been
discovered. All sharing the same
trajectory in three dimensions and
tracing back to an origin somewhere in
the constellation of Karina as if around
200 million years ago they were all
formed together. And perhaps S0136
was formed within that group. maybe
independently as a separate member of
the group or maybe part of one of the
star systems that then got kicked out.
But it seems to be moving on more or
less the same trajectory as the other
members of this collection of fairly
faint stars.
Now, I said it's a rogue planet. It's
actually on the boundary between what we
would call a gas giant planet and a
brown dwarf. The mass is estimated to be
13 times that of Jupiter. And that is
right on the cusp. We give the
designation of gas giant to things like
Saturn and Jupiter and to larger planets
all the way up to this magic figure of
13 Jupiter masses. And then from 13 to
75 or perhaps 80 we call them brown
dwarfs. And above that limit then we
call them stars. And the difference is
that stars carry out ordinary nuclear
fusion using hydrogen protons. They do
the proton proton chain creating helium
and releasing energy. Gas giants don't
do any nuclear reactions at all. And the
brown dwarfs are in between. They can't
generate the temperatures and pressures
necessary to fuse ordinary hydrogen but
they can form the uh heavy hydrogen
dutyium and fuse it into the heavier
elements. So the initial load that they
start with of dutyium can be fused and
they can also do a little bit of lithium
fusion
and release energy that way and
therefore they can be a little bit
warmer but there's precious little of
either of those two isotopes around and
so they don't have very much by way of
fuel. But this magic figure 13 is just
about the cutff point. So below 13, you
won't get enough pressure to be able to
start fusing um the dutyium or even the
lithium reactions. And so simp is one of
those missing link characters that's
right on the boundary between the two.
So what is it? A gas giant or a brown
dwarf? Well, the temperature of 1,243
Kelvin is too high for a gas giant. It
tells us that really we're dealing with
a brown dwarf here. Um, and it puts it
in that T category, the middle ranking
temperature range for brown dwarfs. So,
we have L, T, and Y. These stars go O,
B, A, F, G, K, and M. And then below M
in terms of brightness, below the red
dwarf stars, class M, we have the L
dwarfs.
And then we have T. and then the coolest
Y. And they're classified according to
their uh temperatures. You can see that
a T dwarf is in the range 500 to,500
Kelvin. And this one at 1243 is towards
the hotter end of the T range. So
classed as T2.5.
The numbers after the letter go T0 for
the very hottest T type down to T9 which
would be the coolest.
So this is quite hot for such a low mass
object and that is because it is young.
It is only 200 million years of age and
therefore it still carries most of the
residual heat of formation augmented
perhaps by a little bit of those nuclear
reactions that we were talking about but
really it's at the low mass end of
things. So it's going to struggle to do
anything other than the very simplest
ones.
Now at that sort of temperature it will
glow in the infrared part of the
spectrum and be far easier to detect.
That's why the space telescope Spitzer
which was an infrared telescope was the
first one to detect it. Hubble could
also do observations in the infrared but
it's perfect for James Webb to have a
look at. James Webb is really a
successor to Spitzer more than it is a
successor to Hubble. It can do optical
uh observations, but its real power
comes into play in the infrared. It can
go much deeper into the infrared part of
the spectrum than Hubble ever could. Has
two instruments, the nearspec
spectrometer and the mirror instrument.
Nearspec does near infrared, so 0.6 6 to
5.3 microns and mir longer wavelengths
five microns down to 14 microns for the
mid infrared and that's beyond the reach
of Hubble.
So perfect for studying these relatively
cool objects where all the energy output
is in that infrared band.
So what we were able to observe with
James Webb was that
if you looked at S0136
for a period of a number of hours, you
could see that it was rotating and that
it takes just 2.4 hours to spin around
on its axis. Jupiter takes about 10.
Saturn's a bit longer. And uh it seems
that these larger brown dwarfs pick up
more angular momentum
and uh end up with a higher spin rate
once they've collapsed down to size.
This makes sense rather like a a skater
pulling their arms in when they go into
a spin. They spin up faster. Stars tend
to be slower, but that's because they
tend to push out a lot of uh high energy
particles in their solar wind, and that
carries away the angular momentum, so it
tends to slow them down. So, these uh
brown dwarfs tend to spin quite fast. It
also revealed that we're looking at uh
simp 0136 more or less equator on, which
is a perfect way to look at these
things. it can be rather difficult if
you're looking at them pole on. Now,
you've got the light curve traces for
the different uh color bands, the
different infrared bands, and these were
able to start to tell us not only that
the object varied in brightness from
place to place as it rotated, but it uh
was telling us about the chemical
composition as well. In fact, we have a
weather forecast for S0136.
Partly cloudy with sandstorms and iron
rain lower down. I think that's
fantastic. James Webb monitored the
spectrum or over several rotations using
the nearspec and revealed around about
60 to 70% cloud cover where those clouds
were not made of water vapor like they
are on the earth but they were made of
phosphorite which is magnesium silicate.
So essentially a sandlike rock only this
time it's not just ordinary silicon
dioxide it's magnesium
silicate phosphorite clouds that were
revealed covering about 70% of the
surface but there were gaps through and
we were able to see lower down to signs
of clouds of iron. So, iron rain
probably falling from these clouds onto
the planet. Deeper inside the planet,
the temperature being much hotter
indeed. I call it a planet. I think
planet is a good description for this
object. It's right on the cusp of the
brown dwarf planet line. So, I'm going
with rogue planet.
And we were able to find things out
about the higher atmosphere as well. The
spectrum revealed methane, water, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and
other chemicals. And it reveal an
upwelling of these gases and hot spots,
which we think are caused by aurora.
And the aurora falling of electrons into
the upper atmosphere, triggering
chemical reactions and energizing the
gases. And this is producing a very
complex carbon chemistry as the carbon
monoxide and dioxide get energized by
the electrons and are triggered to react
with the methane and with the ammonia
and create all sorts of interesting
chemical soup in this very very peculiar
atmosphere. So absolutely fascinating um
that this planet can be doing that.
And not only do we think that the aurora
might be present, we've detected them
using the VA, the array of radio
telescopes made famous by that film
Contact with Jodie Foster, where she was
sitting listening for aliens on the
headsets in front of the array of radio
dishes. And these were able to detect
the pulses of radio waves coming from
the aurora on SIM 0136.
and JWST was able to confirm those uh
visible light pulses going with that as
well. Now, this is fantastic and it
might enable us to understand the dynamo
effect that creates the magnetic fields
that result in these aurora here on
Earth. And we think that that requires
you to be rotating fast, which we are in
24 hours, in which S0136
is certainly doing in 2.4 4 hours, 10
times faster for such a large body.
That's a really rapid rotation and
creating a very strong magnetic field.
But usually it requires a liquid metal
core. So maybe there is some sort of
metal core. Maybe that goes with the
iron rain that we were talking about.
But it often is blamed on being in orbit
around the sun in the case of the
planets. So you have to be rotating,
have a conducting core and be inside the
sun's magnetic field and be rotating
around uh in order for the dynamo effect
to be explained. And clearly simp 0136
is not in orbit around a parent star. So
something slightly different going on
there that's going to take some
explaining.
And just to finish off with a suggestion
to explain that is that maybe it's not
actually alone. Maybe it has companions.
Maybe it has some large moon or moons
orbiting around it or another unseen
companion. Not a star but a planet-sized
object or a moonsized object. And it is
the orbital motion relative to that that
is giving us the dynamo effect. So we
need to study this further in order to
determine whether this free floating
planet nearly uh brown dwarfsiz object
is in fact accompanied by its own moon.
So there's definitely been some modeling
suggesting that that might be the case.
So, thanks very much for listening and
that was once around S0136
and I'll leave it there.